In this lecture, we're going to take a look at how our IGP metrics work in the lab.
I've got the same usual setup for the section with my five routers R1 to R5, and the IP addresses
are already configured.
I've got no routing protocols and no static routes configured yet. Let's just verifying that, so at the command
line,
you can see I've done a 'show ip interface brief' and there's the IP addresses and from a 'show ip route'
I can see it's just connected routes there, so there's no routing configured.
First up, let's see what happens with RIP. So
I've got the config ready to go here.
So let's just copy this basic RIP configuration and I'll paste that in on every router.
So we've got it there on R1 on R2, R3, R4, and R5.
And if I look back at the topology again, what we're going to check for is on R1
it's route to 10.1.2.0/24.
So when we're using RIP, you know this already,
the path that it's going to take is going to go along the bottom path.
The reason is that RIP uses hop count as its metric, and it's only two hops to the 10.1.2.0/24 network
over the path through R5.
It would be three hops over the top path.
So RIP doesn't care that the top path has actually got higher bandwidth. Let's verify that at the command
line.
So I'll go to R1 and do a 'show ip route'.
We should see our RIP routes in the routing table now and we're looking for the path to the 10.1.2.0/24
network.
I can see it was learned by RIP and the next hop is 10.0.3.2 which is the bottom path on R5.
And it's going out fastEthernet3/0 on R1.
Okay, let's see what happens if we shutdown that interface. So I go
'config t', I go to interface fastEthernet3/0 and do a 'shutdown.'
When I do this, what's going to happen is the routing protocol is going to reconverge. Meaning, it's
going to see that the path is going down and recalculate the next best path.
This is going to take a little bit of time.
So I've just shutdown the interface,
and if I do a 'show ip route' again, you'll see, actually, what was really quick.
We were just lucky there,
it can often take a bit longer than that.
So it has recalculated the path for 10.1.2.0/24,
and it's now going to 10.0.0.2 which is on the top path to R2, out interface
fastEthernet0/0. To show you the effect of convergence, actually,
if I just do a 'config t' and interface fastEthernet3/0 and do a no 'shutdown' on here and
'end', and if I do a 'show ip route' again you'll see traffic is still going out to 10.0.0.2 interface
to R2. It will take a little bit of time before RIP sees that the better path is back up again and then
it will move back over to going through R5.
Okay, so that was our RIP hop count in action.
Next up, let's have a look at what happens with IS-IS.
So I'll copy a basic IS-IS config in here. Now, with the CCNA exam,
IS-IS is not really tested much on there because like I said before, it's not really used in enterprise
environments unless they're very large and they've got their own MPLS network.
It's more commonly used in service provider networks.
So if you do study for a service provider track later, you will get tested a lot more heavily in IS-IS.
Anyway, let's put that config in to save a bit of time.
I'll put a 'config t' in here at the top to save me typing that every time, and I'm going to need to change
the net address every time as well.
So, hopefully, I'll remember to do that.
It's fine for R1,
so there's my IS-IS config.
Then I need to go back to the text file and just edit this because every router needs to have a unique
net address. So I'll make R2 number 2, R3 will be number 3, and so on. So I'll paste this one into
R2. Go back and edit the text file for R3 and copy that, paste that one into R3. Back to the text
file again, and we need to do R4, copy this and paste that into R4 and then
just one more to do,
which is going to be
our R5 router
and that's going be number 5.
Okay, so I'm pasting in an IS-IS config in here, and what's going to happen is IS-IS routes are going to
replace our RIP routes in the routing table.
The reason for that is administrative distance which is going to be covered in another lecture coming
up really soon in this section.
So I'll do a 'show ip route' on R1 and you can see now that my RIP routes have been removed.
They've been replaced with IS-IS routes.
Again, we're looking for the route to the 10.1.2.0/24 network, which is behind R4.
And right now this is going via 10.0.0.2, which if we have a look at the topology table,
is going along the top path.
Okay, so that's not what we were expecting, right?
Because I didn't configure any costs on my links,
when you don't manually set costs in your links in IS-IS, it's going to act just like RIP because all links
have got the same cost by default.
So basically, it acts using hop count. But if we're using hop count, we'd expect the route to go via R5,
right?
Well, what's probably happening here is just convergence again, where the R1 router will have formed
an adjacency with R2 and learned the route via R2.
It hasn't learned the route via R5 yet. But when it does learn that route from R5, it will see
that it's a better cost and it's going to go out the fastEthernet 3/0 interface instead.
So let's just see if that's happened yet, again you can see before it's going out fastEthernet0/0,
with the next hop of 10.0.0.2.
Let's try this command again, and
there we go.
10.1.2.0 is now going out fastEthernet3/0 which is what we expect.
So that's a good lesson actually that just after you've configured a routing protocol, if you have a look
at the routing table and you're not seeing what you were expecting,
just give it another minute or so and you'll see it will probably reconverge and then you'll get what
you are expecting then.
Okay,
so that was the metric with IS-IS, Actually, let's just check it failing over with this routing protocol
as well. So I'll go 'config t', I'll go to interface fastEthernet3/0 and I will shut that down,
and then do a 'show ip route' and for 10.1.2.0 you can see it's still going via 10.0.3.2,
so it has not reconverged yet.
Again, we need to give it a little bit of time for the routing protocol to detect that the path is going down and
then recalculate the next best path. So I'll put the command in again, you can see it's now reconverged and now for
10.1.2.0, it is going via R2 at 10.0.0.2, the next best path.
Okay, let's remember to bring the interface back up again. So I'll go 'config t', 'interface fastEthernet3/0',
and do a 'no shutdown'. Okay,
so we've had a look at RIP and IS-IS, which are going to take the really the lowest hop count for both
unless you manually set a cost on your links in IS-IS. So RIP uses hop count as its metric. IS-IS uses cost
but all links default to the same cost.
So next up, we'll have a look at another routing protocol.
We'll have a look at OSPF next.
So this one, I can just copy and paste the same config in on every router.
So let's do that on R1 and R2, R3, R4, and R5. And again, because of the administrative
distance, which again we're going to cover later, the OSPF routes are going to replace the IS-IS routes.
So let's do a 'show ip route' and I can see that OSPF has not converged yet.
So let's just try this command again, might have to wait a second for this.
Okay
and there, I got the message in the log that OSPF adjacency has just come up now.
So I hit the up arrow again, and okay, that's just one of my routers.
So I can see I've got an OSPF route in the routing table going out interace fastEthernet0/0,
which is going to R2, so that adjacency has come up but the adjacency to R5
has not come up
yet. I can see that
because I don't have any OSPF routes
going to fastEthernet3/0 yet.
And if I hit the up arrow, I think I still won't see it because I can't see the adjacency coming up yet.
Oh, there is.
Okay,
I see what the problem is. Actually, that last route, that last
IS-IS route is for our Internet interface which I did not include in OSPF but I did include it in
IS-IS.
So, that's why it's showing up there.
So don't worry about that
bottom route.
Okay so OSPF uses cost as its metric and that does take bandwidth into account by default. If we have a
quick look on R5 and I do a 'show ip interface brief' just check the interfaces I'm using, okay,
fastEthernet2/0 and fastEthernet3/0. If I do 'show run fastEthernet2/0', I missed out the interface,
'show run interface fastEthernet2/0', I can see that they're set the bandwidth to 10 megabits per second.
The default bandwidth on fastEthernet is of course 100 megabits per second so I've set my interfaces on
R5 to be lower bandwidth links, and that's why OSPF is preferring to go along the top path rather
than going through R5. So let's just verify that,
and from the show ip route on R1, I can see the route for 10.1.2.0/24 is going through
the top path 10.0.0.2.
So that's different than what we got with RIP and IS-IS, and the reason is the OSPF does take bandwidth into account
by default. If I shutdown the interface fastEthernet0/0 down, which is the one it's currently being used,
then we will see it will fail over to going through R5.
So I saw that my adjacency with the R2 router went down.
If I now do a 'show ip route' and check the traffic for 10.1.2.0/24 network, I can see that it has fail
over to go via R5 at 10.0.3.2. Okay, let's bring the interface back up again, which was fastEhernet0/0
this time. I'll do a 'no shutdown', and the last routing protocol to look at is EIGRP. So let's
bring our text file back up again, I will copy our basic EIGRP configuration and paste that in on every
router. Again, EIGRP is going to be preferred to OSPF because it's got a better administrative distance
so it is going to replace those OSPF routes in the routing table.
And I just need to do a 'config t' on R5 and paste it in,
Okay,
and that should be EIGRP running. It might
just take a minute to converge.
I can see my adjacencies coming up at the command line here.
So if I do a 'show ip route' on R1, and EIGRP, like OSPF, does take bandwidth into account by default,
so I expect my EIGRP routes to go via R2. If we have a look for 10.1.2.0, it is going via R2 at
10.0.0.2.
Again, we can watch EIGRP fail over as well.
If I shutdown that fastEthernet0/0 interface and then just give it a second to converge, so I can see that
the EIGRP adjacency was updated. EIGRP does converge very quickly. If I now do a 'show ip route', for
10.1.2.0,
I can see that it has failed over to 10.0.3.2.
Okay, so that was a look at our routing protocol metrics.
See you in the next lecture.